{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww24280\viewh22500\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl440\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs36 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Laboratory Exercises
\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa319\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 Week 4 Lab: ANOVA issue\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl426\sa0\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 **** Note: You may encounter the following issue in this lab.\'a0When doing the ANOVA for mod2 and mod3, you receive the error message " F test available only for linear mixed model fit by REML".
\f0 \

\f1 The fix is to do one of the following:
\f0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl426\sa0\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 1. Change to the REML flag to TRUE in mod2 and mod3.\'a0
\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl426\sa0\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 2. Use a test.statistic in Anova that is not an F-test. (Use ?Anova to see the options.)
\f0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl426\sa0\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 Either option will get you an answer that is informative.
\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \

\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 The reason this issue arises is because we needed the likelihood from the original fit to look at model performance (as opposed to the approximate REML value).
\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa319\partightenfactor0

\b\fs24 \cf2 Week 4 Lab: mod3 issue\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf2 Here is the explanation of the problem noted in the lab review. The problem was with the pop_rep() function. This function was written assuming random effects were extracted from this formulation of model 3:\
mod3 <-\'a0lmer(d13c ~ 1 + (1|population/family) + block, data = phen, REML = F)\'a0\
and not the other formulation:\
mod3 <- lmer(d13c ~ 1 + (1|population) + (1|family) + block, data = phen, REML = F).\'a0\
The second formulation above was listed as the main way to fit model 3 in number 4 of Part 1 of the lab, while the first formulation above was given as an alternate way to get the same answer. Apparently, I wrote the pop_rep() function after using the first formulation above. \'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 While the statistics reported by the two approaches are the same, the labeling of the output from ranef() is different. In the output from the first formulation, the items in $family include the population names, which was what the grep() function was supposed to be matching on in my pop_rep() function. Since the output from ranef() on the second formulation above does not have population names in $family, there was nothing on which grep() could match. In this case, grep() and hence pop_rep() returns no modifications based on population values, so nothing was added to family effects.\'a0
\fs24 \

\fs26\fsmilli13333 The quick fix is to generate output for mod3 using:
\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf2 mod3 <-\'a0lmer(d13c ~ 1 + (1|population/family) + block, data = phen, REML = F)\'a0\
The long fix requires a rewrite of the pop_rep() function.\'a0\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl426\sa0\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf2 This lab was constructed to give you experience in working with basic quantitative and population genetic analyses useful to testing hypotheses about local adaptation. Phenotypic measurement is undergoing a revolution, so that familiarity with basic methods in quantitative genetics will serve you well in the future. By the end of the laboratory, you should be able to do the following:
\f0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl426\sa0\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 1. Construct, fit, and assess linear mixed models (LMMs) to estimate genetic values for a phenotypic trait measured for families existing in a common garden.
\f0 \

\f1 2. Use LMMs to estimate heritability of a trait, its differentiation among populations, and its correlation with environment.
\f0 \

\f1 3. Test whether or not phenotypic trait differentiation is statistically different than genetic differentiation at random molecular markers.\'a0
\f0 \

\f1 4. Perform and assess output from basic association analyses linking genetic variation with environmental variation.\'a0
\f0 \

\f1 The instructions for the lab, data, and supplemental R functions are in a zipped file at the bottom of this page.
\f0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
}